{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 As a graduate student (and from what I gather for people higher on academia\'92s food chain) you don\'92t really have set hours that you have to work.\
To be honest, it\'92s probably my favorite part of being a PhD student.\
Though this fuzzy divide between work and play can lead to a culture of people who honestly believe that work is always looming above them and that if they do not profess their guilt for not working they can never be forgiven for their unproductively.\
The problem is that this is no way to live your life in my opinion.\
So what do you do about it? \
In this post I\'92ll give you my solution and I think why it works. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 As I write this sentence, I know exactly how much time until my next break (19 minutes and 40 seconds if you\'92re interested).\
When the clock gets down to zero I might get up and make another cup of tea or attend to that unread Facebook message that I have been putting off. \
I really have no idea what I\'92ll do with it, but I do know that as soon as there isn\'92t a clock counting down I am technically off the clock. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
I try to only work using the Pomodoro Technique. \
You can read about the intricacies of it elsewhere (LINK), but it basically boils down to a few simple steps.\
\
1. Literally write down an actionable goal for your current work session.\
2. Set a countdown timer for 20 minutes and work exclusively on that goal. No distractions.\
3. As soon as your timer goes off, you\'92re mentally released from whatever you were working on. If you were in the middle of a thought, do not continue.\
4. Take a 5 minute break and do not do any work.\
5. Rinse and repeat 1 - 4 for up to three sessions, then take a longer break.\
\
That\'92s basically it.\
Though there are really elaborate systems where you count the amount of pomodori you need to do a task and yada yada yada.\
\
\
Why you stop.\
Importance of boundaries.\
Move towards healthier work life balance, find it\'92s much more satisfying. \
\
}
