+++
date = "2018-03-23T00:00:00"
title = "Root Interval Schemas in Rock Music"
abstract = "Rock music differs in its functional harmonic behaviors from more well-studied repertoires, such as the music of the common practice. Before it is possible to conduct harmonic analyses of the rock repertoire, one must arrive at an understanding of those harmonic expectations that are unique to rock music. There have been several recent attempts along these lines, but the literature is conflicted on its basic approaches to the problem (Stephenson, 2002; Nobile, 2016; Acevedo, 2017). In this paper, we put forward a model of rock music schemas that synthesizes and streamlines past approaches. Rather than deriving harmonic exceptions from a chord’s placement within the scale, we propose instead that listeners derive their harmonic expectations from root motion schemas. We extracted these root-motion schemas through a corpus analysis of both the Temperley/de Clercq Rock corpus and the McGill Billboard corpus. Analysis based on our approach provides empirical evidence for claims made by prior scholars. In addition, we are confident that our model captures the essential differences between rock music and that of the common practice. The model of harmonic expectations generated by our theory provides a simple framework for harmonic analysis of rock music in future research. "
abstract_short = ""
event = "South Central Society for Music Theory, 2018"
event_url = "http://www.scsmt.org/conferences/scsmt_2018/2018_program/"
location = "Hattiesburg, Mississippi"

selected = false
math = true

url_pdf = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""

# Optional featured image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
[header]
image = "fortunateson.png"
caption = ""

+++


